Dear young people, we heard in the Gospel
how Jesus calls us to remain in His love.
Last Sunday, Jesus similarly
spoke about love, but He set
criteria for how we should love.
We listened to that passage
of the Gospel on Sunday.
Today, the word love is used so
frequently, but above all, it is used
so incomprehensibly that everything and
anything is associated with love, even
things that are not true love at all.
And then Jesus not only gives this
commandment in the Gospel to remain
in His love, but today He also
warns us about how we should love.
Because often, we have our own criteria
for what love is and how to love.
Love is portrayed in movies,
songs, poetry, literature, and
relationships, but, as I said,
not all of it is true love.
What is Jesus teaching us?
So, we know that in the Old Testament
we have this commandment of love.
And in two places it says,
"Love your God," how?
"With all your heart." And then it
says, "Love yourself... Love your neighbor
as you love yourself." And what is
the criterion for proper love here?
It's not good.
Jesus refines it.
It's not good because what if someone
has a small heart, little love for
God, it says, "Love God with all your
heart." What if someone has a closed
heart, a stone heart, and the commandment
says, "Love God with all your heart?"
What if the measure of love for
others is how much I love myself?
Today, you young people,
50% don't love themselves.
50% or more.
So, how can it be a measure to love
my neighbor as I love myself when many
despise their own lives, when they don't
love their own lives, and God commands
us to love others as we love ourselves?
However, these are commandments
from the Old Testament.
That's why Jesus sets a
different criterion and says.
And he said this at the Last Supper when
he was saying goodbye to his disciples.
Love as I love you.
So, what I explained earlier,
that's the criterion of human love.
But Jesus doesn't want human
love to be our standard for love.
And we can hear this a lot today.
We talk about some kind of emotional
love that falls apart quickly.
We talk about relationships
that break up frequently.
And we see that we are not
talking about true love.
Because we love on a human level,
as much as we can, and how we can,
and we declare how long love lasts.
Can love have an expiration date?
It cannot.
So why does it end for some people?
Obviously, that wasn't
love; it was emotions.
Many young people today follow their
emotions and declare them as some kind
of love that breaks down frequently.
But that's a human criterion for love.
And Jesus says a new
commandment, he adds to this.
Love as I have loved you.
When did Jesus say this to them?
He said it at the moment when everyone
had betrayed him, left him, when
suffering lay ahead of him, when the
path of the cross lay ahead of him.
When the agony in the Garden of
Gethsemane lay ahead of him, nothing
shook Jesus to stop loving us.
Neither crisis, nor persecution, nor
scourging—Jesus knows what is coming.
He wants to say, remain steadfast
in your love for God because I
love you so much that I will not
give up on you for any sacrifice.
That is love.
When we love at the cost of everything
that happens in our lives, at
the cost of suffering, you cannot
separate love from suffering.
Love cannot melt away in
suffering or misunderstanding.
And that's why it's important to say at
the start of this sermon that many people
still don't understand what true love is.
Many still live in the Old Testament
and cling to this human dimension—how
they love themselves, how they
love others, how they have a heart,
that's how much they love God.
However, Jesus teaches
us something different.
A distorted image of love, my dear
ones, is often present in our lives.
A distorted image of
love is often imposed.
When some feeling melts away,
dissolves, and disappears, so does love.
That is not love.
Love is where the cross is.
The first thing that Jesus
encourages us to do in today's
gospel is to remain in his love.
And he says, remain in my love.
And how will you, he says, remain?
By keeping my commandments.
How many young people today keep
God's commandments, living in some
emotional, misguided love, creating
love and declaring it by their own
criteria, not by God's commandments.
Jesus clearly says today, you will remain
in my love if you keep my commandments.
We have believers, we have young
people who come to church, who follow
and respect some commandments, but
have arbitrarily decided that some
no longer morally apply to them.
I have a question, can love
and morality be separated?
Can love be against morality?
No, it cannot.
Love and morality are not in opposition.
They go together, and that's why
it's necessary to follow all of God's
commandments to remain in His love.
You, my dears, are a generation that
doesn't let anyone tell you anything.
There are fewer and fewer who
listen to their parents, and parents
are the most sincere friends.
Fewer and fewer people are listening
to the voice of the Gospel.
Why should I be constrained
by norms or some moral code?
Live while you're young.
That's how Saint Augustine thought.
He lived in his time,
let's say, turbulently.
He was driven by feelings,
driven by passion.
Many young people today have nothing
else on their minds but to have a good
time, to party, to joke around, to let
life pass by in who knows what, and
then you go to bed with an empty heart.
I feel so sorry for you sometimes, young
people, going to bed with empty hearts.
You long for love so much, you
try so hard to attain it, but
it slips through your fingers.
It slips away because you're
looking for it in the wrong place.
How hard you try to gain love, whether
it's friendship or romantic love.
In the end, how many of you, young
people, are disappointed in love?
How many of you have closed yourselves
off to love because you're afraid?
And you have the right to be, if you've
been disappointed once, twice, three
times, then you no longer allow anyone
to get close to you, not even God.
Now, you see, Saint Augustine
lived through the same thing.
However, at one point, he came to a
realization, and thanks to his mother's
prayers, he himself said, "My heart
is restless until it rests in you."
Today, telling a young person that they
can find all the answers, both in love and
in life, through faith, they'll say you're
old-fashioned, that you live in the Middle
Ages, what are you talking about, live.
But I tell you, even Saint Augustine
said, there is no heart that will find
peace, no person who will find their
peace without God, because we will always
be restless, always missing that place.
And so the question arises, well, Stjepan,
give us an answer on how we can grow
in that love, don't just criticize.
Well, my dears, the first thing you need
to do to start growing in love is to
realize that you don't know how to love.
The first step to growing in
love is to acknowledge that
you don't know how to love.
Love begins where you dare to admit
that you can't love on your own, and
at that moment, God enters your heart.
God then begins to enable you to love.
That's why Saint Augustine says,
"Late have I loved you, beauty
so old and so new." Dear young
people, I know it's sometimes hard
to admit to yourself that you're
looking for love in the wrong place.
I know it's sometimes hard to
admit that we beg for love.
But let God teach you.
We often recommend many guides on
love, five steps for this, four
for that, three for something else.
Let God teach you step by step.
Not social media, not random
literature, not friendly advice,
because someone is teaching you how
to love and advising you in your
relationship with God or your neighbor.
How to live, while they themselves
are wounded and unfulfilled.
Have you ever heard someone who is
divorced speak beautifully about love?
Have you heard someone who is divorced
encourage others, saying, "Look,
maybe I didn't know how to love,
but you try, you might succeed"?
But many will often say, "Don't do
what I did." And that's not right.
What's right is to admit that
maybe I didn't know how to love
somewhere along the way, but that
doesn't mean others can't succeed.
It doesn't mean everyone
should stop believing in love.
So, how do you grow in love?
You grow in love, my dears,
when you serve others.
We have a very beautiful
example in Saint Joseph.
Were the circumstances in which
Saint Joseph met Mary and in
which she became pregnant ideal?
Did they have all the security that
you seek today, like having a college
degree, at least a small apartment, a
car, and then thinking about marriage?
Did they have all the conditions?
Did Joseph prepare everything
before marrying Mary, or
did he have faith in God?
He remained faithful to God,
and how did his love grow?
By serving Mary and Jesus in silence.
Love is often quiet.
Love doesn't make a lot of noise.
It serves.
And the world today
can't handle that word.
That's why I say, today's world...
Glamour, noise, and entertainment
are often proclaimed as ideal love,
but in reality, love is something
entirely different because it is quiet.
It is not a feeling; it is service.
Just look at Saint Joseph and Mary.
Many of you are waiting for the
perfect time to create love.
You need to prepare yourselves for love
first, and then create everything else.
First, love happens to birds,
and then they build a nest.
Not the other way around—building a
nest and then looking for a partner.
So, love is often cruel.
Today, I mentioned this saint, Saint Rita.
She was born into a family in their
later years, where the parents
prayed a lot to have that child.
Even then, she was somehow a
sign from God to her parents.
At that time, her parents promised her
to a husband who wasn't exactly an ideal
example, a rough man without feelings.
But back then, parental authority was
respected, and she honored it, even
though she always wanted to enter
a convent rather than get married.
However, she ended up with
such a man who was, let's say,
rough, hard, and insensitive.
And as I mentioned at the beginning
of the sermon, Saint Rita didn't
choose whom she would marry, but
she chose how she would love.
You young people today choose
whom you will marry, but few of
you choose how you will love.
That's why many get divorced, because
you choose, choose, spend so many years
choosing, and still miss the mark.
Because you haven't resolved things within
yourself, when you enter any relationship,
be it a partnership, a monastery, a
marriage, whatever, how do you love?
What happened to her?
She decided to love, and
with her love, she converted,
transformed such a rigid husband.
Now, Jesus says, remain in my love.
Her commitment was to
remain in God's love.
And she soaked her husband
with God's love and succeeded.
He converted.
You know, her other misfortune was that
her husband died, that he was killed.
She had two sons.
And the sons, under the influence
of their uncle, wanted to
avenge their father's death.
And imagine a mother praying to God
that they would rather die than sin.
That God would rather take them
than let them avenge their father.
Rather than fall into grave
sin and end up in hell.
Imagine a mother praying
for her children to die.
But that is pure love.
It sounds strange for a mother
to pray for her child to die, but
she wanted to save them from hell.
Today, we have mothers who relativize
their daughters' and sons' sins.
They say, "What can I do? They
live in sin, it's their choice."
Today, a mother might see that her
child is living in serious sin,
perhaps addicted to drugs or something
else, but she won't help them.
She stays silent so the neighbors
don't hear, so it's not known that the
child is addicted to drugs, gambling,
or not living in premarital purity.
Where have those mothers gone?
Where is that love for
the soul of my child?
Imagine that your child could end
up, God forbid, in hell tomorrow.
Because no one prayed for
him to repent, to warn him.
Look at everything that Rita did.
She had such divine love within
her that she managed to convert the
vulnerable person she lived with.
Many imagine holiness as an ideal
state and a withdrawal from this world.
However, holiness is realized
in all our concrete lives.
There is no ideal time for holiness.
Holiness is your moment that
you are living right now.
It is encouraging to observe her
life, so martyr-like and suffering,
but she fulfilled this command
of Jesus: Remain in my love.
Whoever remains in God's love through the
greatest trials and sufferings, endures.
Blessed Carlo Acutis from Assisi, the
saint in jeans, is dear to all of us.
What did he say about love?
You know that he suffered from leukemia
and that as a young man, with the
little life he had, he was so in
love with God, so devoted to God,
observing the sacraments and encouraging
others even when he needed help.
What does he say about love?
I die happy because I haven't wasted a
single minute on anything that isn't love.
That's why many people, when
they encounter God, wouldn't
want to leave the church.
They used to go to church before, but
they didn't see Him, they didn't feel Him.
Sometimes we spend a lot of
our lives in church, but we've
wasted love somewhere else.
And that's why I like his sentence, "I
die happy because I haven't wasted a
single minute on anything that isn't
love." Holiness isn't about everything
going your way, but about remaining God's
even when everything is falling apart.
That's the message of today's saint.
It's easy to be at peace in calm times,
easy to be in an ideal atmosphere.
But when the cross, suffering,
or unforeseen circumstances
come, that's when it matters.
You, young people, don't consider
that in life, just like for all of
us who are a bit older, you will
encounter unpredictable situations.
In those situations, remember
what Saint Rita herself did.
You then decide, if you are not
satisfied with that situation, how you
will love to transform that situation.
That's why I said, holiness is not about
everything happening as we imagined,
but rather that in every situation
you go through, you remain God's.
You remain with God, and
that is the greatest wisdom.
When you look at the life of Saint
Rita, she had every possible reason to
become bitter, to become disappointed.
She had parents whom she loved,
that was the first blow, she lost
her parents, her main support, then
her husband, then her two sons.
So she had every reason to become
bitter, however... She chose
differently, to be free and not bitter.
Sometimes I feel that our believers choose
bitterness; they say they are believers,
but they don't want to come out of their
bitterness, they don't want to come out
of their wounds, they don't want to fight.
Transform that wound of yours.
Transform that pain, that
relationship, whatever happened to
you, God's love can transform it.
That's why it's important to stay in Him.
Saint Rita, in the end, from her initial
dream as a child to become a nun and
enter the convent, did get married and
went in a completely different direction.
Were her dreams lost?
No, God just fulfilled
them in a different way.
At the end of her life,
she did enter the convent.
Even though they didn't want
to accept her right away.
She wanted to completely
dedicate herself to God.
And she prayed to God to receive
a thorn on her forehead to remind
her of His suffering and pain.
And she received it.
What is your thorn?
Maybe you have a thorn in your
heart, maybe you have a thorn
in your family, maybe you have a
thorn at university, be persistent.
Because why?
Because suffering and the
cross bring resurrection.
Be a generation of saints, not
a generation of influencers.
So be a generation of saints or holy
influencers, whatever you choose, but
be those who bear witness to love.
In the end, may her intercession and that
of all the other saints, especially Saint
Anthony, guide us to remain in his love.
Amen.